javascript_cheat_sheet
======================

Quick JavaScript guide; notes that I've taken primarily from working through Codecademy's JavaScript tutorial, and from Stack Overflow.

[Some differences](https://blog.glyphobet.net/essay/2557) between Python and JavaScript.

# Data types
**Primary (primitive)**: numbers, strings, Booleans (true, false)

**Composites**: objects, arrays

**Special**: null, undefined

# Numbers
Check whether a value is **not** a number: `isNaN(value)`

This coerces type: `isNaN("10")` is true.

# Strings
Length of string: `"string".length;`

Substrings: `"string".substring(x, y);`

Split a string: `"string".split(separator [,n]);`

Returns an array generated by splitting the string on a separator, up to `n` times. Without a separator, returns a single-element array containing the string. With an empty separator `''`, it returns an array of individual characters. `separator` can be a regex.  

Make string uppercase: `"string".toUpperCase();`

Make string lowercase: `"string".toLowerCase();`

# Arrays
Store lists of data (can be different data types); ordered

    var someArray = [item1, item2, item3];
	
Access elements, e.g.

    someArray[0] // first element

## Addition to arrays:

Single item:

    someArray.push(item);

`push()` method adds the item and returns the new length of `someArray`.

### Adding one array to another:

Can use the `concat` method:

    someArray.concat(anotherArray);

`concat()` **creates a new array**.

If you don't want to create a new array, you can do addition to an array in place instead:

    newArray.push.apply(newArray, otherArray);

However, for very large arrays, [this can fail and you need to use loops](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/4156101/javascript-push-array-values-into-another-array) instead.

# Formatting
End statements with semicolon.

Comments: `//`

Single quotes, double equivalent.

# Make things appear in windows or log
Make box appear containing value:
`alert(value);`

Make confirmation box appear containing value:
`confirm(value);`

Prompt user for input:
`prompt(value);`

Print something to console:
`console.log(value);`

# Comparison operators
## Relational operators

`===` strict equal to

`==` equal to

`!==` strict not equal to

`!=` not equal to

[Strict comparisons do not coerce types; the types must be the same to be equal](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/359494/does-it-matter-which-equals-operator-vs-i-use-in-javascript-comparisons), e.g. `"100" === 100` is `false`, but `"100" == 100` is `true`.

## Logical operators

`&&` AND

`||` OR

`!` NOT

So, to check `variable` is in the (inclusive) range of value1 and value2:

    if (value1 <= variable && variable <= value2) {...

# Variables
Declare (create) a variable (case-sensitive, normally camelCase):
`var varName = value;`

Reassign variable:
`varName = anotherValue`

## Global versus local variables:
Declare variable outside a function; global, accessible anywhere
Inside a function; local, only accessible within function

`var` creates variable in current scope 

# Conditionals

## if

    if (condition) {
        statements
    } else if (condition) {
        statements
    } else {
        statements
    }

## switch

Alternative to if...else:
    
    switch(expression)
        case label1:
            statements
            [break;]
        case label2:
            statements
            [break;]
        default:
            statements
            [break;]

Checks if any of the cases in the switch match the case labels and execute the code in them. When a break statement is reached, execution continues after the switch statement.

`break`ing is optional. However, if a `break` is not included for a `case`, the statements in `default` will execute too.

The break under default is unnecessary as you have already reached the end of the switch statement at that point, [but still worth including](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/2729813/switch-statements-do-you-need-the-last-break-javascript-mainly).


# Loops

## for

    for (var i=1; i < 10; i++) {
        statements
    }

Can iterate over arrays too:

Set the condition to be the length of the array and access the current element of the array with e.g. `someArray[i]` e.g.

    for (var i = 0; i < someArray.length; i++) {
        console.log(someArray[i]);
    }
    
## while

    while(condition) {
        statements
    }

### do/while

    do {
        statements
    } while (condition);

Executes the loop body *once*, regardless of the condition state. checking condition on subsequent iterations.

# Functions
Can declare a named function:

    function someFunction(args) {
        statements
    }

This is defined at *script parse time* so can be called any time.

Often used is an anonymous function with a variable:

    var someFunction = function(args) {
        statements
    };

This is defined at *runtime* so can only be called after this line is executed.

# Math(s)
Choose a floating point number between 0 and 1: 
    
    math.random();

Generate random integers:

Unlike Python, there's no randint() function :( So, the typical way to generate a random integer is by generating a random float and rounding to an integer: 

    var randomInteger = Math.floor(Math.random() * x + y)

Specifying integers `x` and `y` will produce a random integer between y and y+x-1

[Why Math.floor and not Math.round?](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/7377735/random-numbers-and-floor-vs-round-function)

# Increment/decrement by 1 or n

    i++ 
    i--
    i += n
    i -= n

(not really recommended outside of for loops)
